### Terminology

#### Population
- All the members of a group about which you want to reach a conclusion.

Symbol used: $\mu$

#### Sample
- The part of the population selected for analysis

Symbol used: $\bar{X}$

#### Variable
- A characteristic of an item or individual that will be analyzed using statistics

#### Parameter
- A measure that describes a variable (characteristic) of a population

#### Outlier
- A data point that differs significantly from other observations

*As a rough rule of thumb, we can flag any point that is located more than three standard deviations above or below the mean as an outlier.*

Outliers are often the result of data errors such as mixing data of different units (kilometers versus meters) or bad readings from a sensor. When outliers are the result of bad data, the mean will result in a poor estimate of location, while the median will still be valid.


In any case, outliers should be identified and are usually worthy of further investigation.

#### Statistic
- A measure that describes a variable (characteristic) of a sample (part of a population)

## Branches of statistics

#### Descriptive statistics
- The branch of statistics that focuses on collecting, summarizing, and presenting a set of data

#### Inferential statistics
- The branch of statistics that analyzes sample data to reach conclusions about a population

 When you use inferential statistics, you start with a hypothesis and look to see whether the data are consistent with that hypothesis.</br>
This deeper level of analysis means that inferential statistical methods can be easily misapplied or misconstrued and that many inferential methods require a calculating or computing device.

## Types of variables

### Numerical variables
Data that are expressed on a numeric scale.
- **Continuous**: numerical data that can take on any value within an interval.
Values are *measures*, and any value can theoretically occur, limited only by the precision of the measuring process.
    - *(Synonyms: interval, float, numeric)*
- **Discrete**: numerical data that can take on only specific values within an interval.
Values are *counts* of things
    - *(Synonyms: integer, count)*

### Categorical variables
Data that can take on only a specific set of values representing a set of possible categories.
- **Binary**: categorical data with only two categories of values.
    - (Synonyms: dichotomous, logical, indicator, boolean)
- **Ordinal**: categorical data that has an explicit ordering.
    - *(Synonym: ordered factor)*


## Sources of Data

You begin every statistical analysis by identifying the source of the data that you will use for data collection.

### Published sources
Data available in print or in electronic form, including data found on Internet websites. Primary data sources are those published by the individual or group that collected the data. Secondary data sources are those compiled from primary sources.

>You should always consider the possible bias of the publisher and whether the data contain all the necessary and relevant variables when using published sources. This is especially true of sources found through Internet search engines.

### Experiments
A study that examines the effect on a variable of varying the value(s) of another variable or variables while keeping all other things equal. A typical experiment contains both a treatment group and a control group. The treatment group consists of those individuals or things that receive the treatment(s) being studied. The control group consists of those individuals or things that do not receive the treatment(s) being studied.

Proper experiments are either single-blind or double-blind. A study is a single-blind experiment if only the researcher conducting the study knows the identities of the members of the treatment and control groups. If neither the researcher nor study participants know who is in the treatment group and who is in the control group, the study is a double-blind experiment.

### Surveys
A process that uses questionnaires or similar means to gather values for the responses from a set of participants

Surveys are either <b>informal</b>, open to anyone who wants to participate; <b>targeted</b>, directed toward a specific group of individuals; or include people <b>chosen at random</b>. The type of survey affects how the data collected can be used and interpreted.


## Sampling concepts

### Frame
The list of all items in the population from which a sample will be selected

Frames influence the results of an analysis, and using different frames can lead to different conclusions. You should always be careful to make sure your frame completely represents a population; otherwise, any sample selected will be biased, and the results generated by analyses of that sample will be inaccurate.

### Nonprobability Sampling
The process by which members of a *population* are selected for a *sample*

### Probability Sampling
A sampling process that considers the chance of selection of each item. Probability sampling increases your chance that the sample will be representative of the population.

> You should use probability sampling whenever possible because only this type of sampling enables you to apply inferential statistical methods to the data you collect. In contrast, you should use nonprobability sampling, in which the chance of occurrence of each item being selected is not known, to obtain rough approximations of results at low cost or for small-scale, initial, or pilot studies that will later be followed up by a more rigorous analysis. Surveys and polls that invite the public to call in or answer questions on a web page are examples of nonprobability sampling.

### Simple Random Sampling
Every item from a population has the same chance of selection as every other item. Every possible sample of a certain size has the same chance of being selected as every other sample of that size.

### Stratified Sampling
The items in the frame are first subdivided into groups, or strata, and a simple random samples is selected within each of the strata.

### Cluster Sampling
The items in the frame are divided into several clusters so that each cluster is representative of the entire population. A random sampling of clusters is then taken, and all the items in each selected cluster or a sample from each cluster are then studied.

## Sample Selection Methods

### Sampling with replacement
A sampling method in which each selected item is returned to the **frame** from which it was selected so that it has the same probability of being selected again.

### Sampling without replacement
A sampling method in which each selected item is not returned to the **frame** from which it was selected. Using this technique, an item can be selected no more than one time.

 Sampling without replacement means that an item can be selected no more than one time. You should choose sampling without replacement instead of sampling with replacement because statisticians generally consider the former to produce more desirable samples.
